.TH ZSCALERCTL 1 "" "zscalerctl" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zscalerctl \- read-only Zscaler configuration query and sanitized dump tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zscalerctl
[\fIglobal flags\fR] \fIcommand\fR [\fIargs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zscalerctl
is a read-only command-line tool for authorized Zscaler administrators to
query configuration, inspect inventory, and produce sanitized dumps. It is
machine-first: stdout carries data, stderr carries diagnostics, exit codes are
stable, and output is allow-list projected and redacted before it is written.
It never mutates tenant state and never emits secret material in normal output.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-profile " name"
Metadata label echoed in \fBconfig show\fR and \fBdoctor\fR output to tag the
run. It does not select any configuration: all configuration comes from
\fBZSCALERCTL_*\fR environment variables, and there are no profile config
files.
.TP
.BI \-\-format " auto|table|json|ndjson|pretty"
Output format. Defaults to \fBauto\fR, which renders the human-readable
\fBpretty\fR form when stdout is a terminal and \fBjson\fR otherwise (pipe,
redirect, or \fB\-\-output\fR file), so interactive use is readable while
pipelines stay machine-parseable. \fBtable\fR is the tab-separated form;
\fBpretty\fR is a bordered/aligned overlay of the same sanitized data.
\fBndjson\fR is newline-delimited JSON \(em one compact record per line \(em for
streaming/pipeline consumers; it applies to resource \fBlist\fR/\fBget\fR/\fBshow\fR
output only and is rejected by other commands.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " path"
Write command output to a file instead of stdout (not valid with dump).
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " duration"
Per-request timeout (e.g. 30s). Must be positive. This bounds each HTTP request
(including the token exchange), not the whole invocation; a large \fBdump\fR
making many requests is not capped end-to-end. Impose a whole-run limit
externally (for example with \fBtimeout(1)\fR) if you need one.
.TP
.BI \-\-redaction " standard|share|paranoid"
Redaction mode applied to rendered fields.
.TP
.BI \-\-color " auto|always|never"
Color policy for human output.
.TP
.B \-\-no-color
Disable color output (equivalent to \-\-color never; NO_COLOR is also honored).
.TP
.B \-\-no-cache
Bypass the API cache where supported.
.TP
.BI \-\-log-level " off|error|warn|info|debug"
Diagnostic logging to stderr. Defaults to off. Diagnostics are metadata only
and never include record values, credentials, or secrets. During a long
\fBdump\fR, \fB\-\-log-level info\fR reports progress on stderr: a starting
event with the selected resource count, one event per resource as it is read,
and a completion summary with the resource and error counts.
.TP
.BI \-\-fields " a,b,c"
Comma-separated list of output fields to keep, applied across all formats. It
can only narrow the already-sanitized output; it cannot reveal a dropped or
secret field. An unknown field name is a usage error.
.TP
.BI \-\-filter " key=value | key~value"
Narrow list results to records whose rendered field value matches:
\fBkey=value\fR is an exact match, \fBkey~value\fR a case-insensitive
substring match. Repeatable; all filters must match (AND). Valid for
\fBlist\fR operations only; anywhere else it is a usage error. Filtering runs
strictly after projection and redaction, so it can only narrow the sanitized
record set: a filter naming a dropped or secret field matches nothing, and a
record lacking the key does not match. No matches is success (exit 0) with an
empty result.
.TP
.BI \-\-search " term"
Narrow list results to records where any rendered field value contains
\fIterm\fR (case-insensitive), including array and nested values via their
rendered string forms. Valid for \fBlist\fR operations only; same
post-projection guarantees as \fB\-\-filter\fR, and may be combined with it.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B <product> <resource> list
List a resource for a product (\fBzia\fR, \fBzpa\fR, \fBztw\fR, \fBzcc\fR,
\fBzidentity\fR), e.g. \fBzscalerctl zia locations list\fR.
.TP
.B <product> <resource> get <id>
Get a single resource by id, where the resource supports it.
.TP
.B <product> <resource> show
Show a singleton/status resource that yields one record.
.TP
.B zia url-lookup <url> [url...]
Resolve the URL category classifications for one or more URLs or domains,
including security-alert categories and the matched cloud application. A
diagnostic query, not a catalog resource: the backing endpoint performs a pure
lookup and never modifies tenant state. At least one URL is required.
.TP
.B dump \-\-out <dir> [\-\-products ...] [\-\-resources ...] [\-\-continue-on-error] [\-\-force]
Write a sanitized multi-resource dump (manifest.json, redaction_report.json,
per-resource files, and errors.ndjson on failure) into a new directory.
\fB\-\-force\fR replaces an existing destination, but only after verifying it is
itself a zscalerctl dump directory; it refuses to follow symlinks and refuses
the current working directory, the home directory, and the filesystem root.
.TP
.B diff <old-dump-dir> <new-dump-dir> [\-\-products ...] [\-\-resources ...] [\-\-ignore-operational] [\-\-detail] [\-\-allow-partial] [\-\-fail-on-drift]
Compare two existing dump directories and emit a local drift report. List and
array fields are compared in order, so reordering a list is reported as drift.
The command performs no live API calls and does not schedule collection; use
cron, CI, or another external scheduler to create dumps at the cadence you need.
The flags are:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-detail
Add record-level rows (the individual added/removed/changed records) to the
\fBtable\fR and \fBpretty\fR reports. It is a no-op under \fB\-\-format json\fR,
whose report already contains the full record-level detail.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore-operational
Ignore fields classified as operational metadata (such as identifiers and SDK
timestamps) on keyed and singleton resources, so only configuration changes are
reported.
.TP
.B \-\-allow-partial
Permit the comparison to proceed when an input dump is partial (was written
with some resources failing) instead of refusing it.
.TP
.B \-\-fail-on-drift
Return exit 7 when added, removed, or changed records are detected; without it,
drift is reported with exit 0.
.RE
.TP
.B schema list
Print the resource catalog (products, resources, operations, field model).
.TP
.B doctor
Report configuration readiness and the resolved auth mode without exposing
secrets. \fBdoctor\fR inspects \fBZSCALERCTL_*\fR configuration only and never
contacts Zscaler; its \fBlive_api\fR field is derived from whether credentials
are configured, not from a live reachability probe.
.TP
.B auth status
Report credential presence and live-API reachability.
.TP
.B config show
Render the active, secret-safe configuration.
.TP
.B completion bash|zsh|fish|powershell
Print a shell completion script.
.TP
.B version
Print version, commit, and build date.
.TP
.B help
Print usage.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Credentials and settings are read only from the \fBZSCALERCTL_*\fR namespace;
the tool deliberately ignores the SDK's own environment variables.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_CLIENT_ID, ZSCALERCTL_CLIENT_SECRET, ZSCALERCTL_VANITY_DOMAIN
OneAPI (Zidentity) credentials. \fBZSCALERCTL_CLIENT_SECRET_FILE\fR reads the
secret from an owner-only file.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_ZPA_CUSTOMER_ID, ZSCALERCTL_ZPA_MICROTENANT_ID
Required ZPA customer id and optional microtenant id.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_ZIA_USERNAME, ZSCALERCTL_ZIA_PASSWORD, ZSCALERCTL_ZIA_API_KEY, ZSCALERCTL_ZIA_CLOUD
Legacy ZIA credentials (with \fB_FILE\fR variants for password and API key)
when \fBZSCALERCTL_AUTH_MODE=zia-legacy\fR.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_PROFILE
Default for \fB\-\-profile\fR. Like the flag, it is only a metadata label
echoed in \fBconfig show\fR and \fBdoctor\fR output; it selects no
configuration.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_REDACTION, ZSCALERCTL_NO_CACHE
Optional defaults mirroring the matching flags.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_AUTH_MODE
Authentication mode: \fBoneapi\fR (the default) or \fBzia-legacy\fR. There is no
flag equivalent.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_CLOUD
OneAPI cloud to target (for example \fBPRODUCTION\fR). Environment-only; there is
no flag equivalent.
.TP
.B ZSCALERCTL_PROXY_URL, ZSCALERCTL_PROXY_FROM_ENV
Explicit proxy settings; ambient HTTP_PROXY/HTTPS_PROXY discovery is off by
default.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set to any value, disables colored output (equivalent to \fB\-\-color
never\fR). Honored in addition to the \fBZSCALERCTL_*\fR namespace.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Internal error.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error: an invalid CLI flag, an invalid resource id, an invalid
\fBZSCALERCTL_*\fR configuration value, or invalid proxy configuration.
.TP
.B 3
Missing or invalid credentials.
.TP
.B 4
Resource not found or unsupported, including a product or resource the tenant
is not entitled to.
.TP
.B 5
Live API access failure.
.TP
.B 6
Partial dump (some resources failed; see errors.ndjson).
.TP
.B 7
Drift detected when \fBdiff \-\-fail-on-drift\fR is used.
.SH EXAMPLES
Enumerate every product, resource, operation, and field in the catalog:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl \-\-format json schema list
.EE
.RE
.PP
List a resource as machine-readable JSON:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl \-\-format json zia locations list
.EE
.RE
.PP
Get a single resource by id:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl \-\-format json zia locations get 12345
.EE
.RE
.PP
Show a singleton/status resource:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl \-\-format json zia advanced-settings show
.EE
.RE
.PP
Narrow a list with a case-insensitive substring filter:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl zia url-filtering-rules list \-\-filter name~social
.EE
.RE
.PP
Write a sanitized, single-product dump to a scratch directory:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl dump \-\-products zia \-\-out ./scratch-live-dump
.EE
.RE
.PP
Compare two existing dumps and fail when drift is detected:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl \-\-format json diff ./old-dump ./new-dump \-\-fail-on-drift
.EE
.RE
.PP
Resolve the URL category classification for a URL:
.RS
.EX
zscalerctl zia url-lookup https://example.com
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation under \fBdocs/\fR, including ARCHITECTURE.md,
THREAT_MODEL.md, and the published dump and diff schemas in docs/schema/.
